# Tea's Guardian Guide

(updated November 2021)

The Guardian class is simple to play, but hard to master. It is easy to build, with very few core rainbows and easy to farm gear. Your rotations are short and simple, with few buffs to keep track of. But you are also the cornerstone of the team – if you make mistakes, your team will likely wipe. Consistency and adaptability is key in being a great Guardian.

## Some terms

In case you are not familiar with some of the terms/abbreviations/acronyms that players often use, here are some you may want to know as a guardian:

- tanks: refers to guardians
- pdef/mdef: physical/magic defense
- phys/pdmg/mag/mdmg: physical/magic damage
- miti: mitigation - refers to the physical/magic damage taken down buffs provided by shields
- aggro/hate: refers to the metric by which bosses decide who to target their (single-target) attacks
- back: refers to the back lane or moving to the back lane
- TB: tankbuster - a single-target attack that will do heavy damage or outright kill you without enough buffs/debuffs/backing
- RB: raidbuster - a strong party-wide attack
- cleave: an attack that only hits one lane - at least one person (usually you) needs to be in the lane to take the hit, otherwise it hits everyone; most cleaves hit the front lane but some do hit the back lane
- DK: refers to activating your Dragon Kin on an attack
- ST: single-target

Weapons are also often abbreviated - see the [weapons](#weapons) section for some of these.


## Priorities

Your priorities in a fight are, in order:

1. Do not let the cleric die
2. Stay alive
3. Maintain aggro
4. Maintain buffs

## Mechanics

### Damage and resistances

The damage taken formula in Mitrasphere is:

> attack damage * 5000 / (defense + 5000) * (sum of damage down buffs) * (sum of elemental resistances)

For example, if you take 15000 damage with 5000 pdef and mitra/steel buffs (80% damage down = 20% of original damage):

> 15000 * 5000 / (5000 + 5000) * 0.2 = 1500

If you put on 5000 more pdef for a total of 10000 pdef:

> 15000 * 5000 / (10000 + 5000) * 0.2 = 1000

If instead you put on 30% elemental resistance from your armor and accessories:

> 15000 * 5000 / (5000 + 5000) * 0.2 * 0.7 = 1050

The fact that doubling your pdef barely does better than just matching your gear to the right element tells you this damage formula heavily favors stacking resistances over stacking defense stats. Until you have good guardian gear for every element, you will almost always be better off sacrificing defensive stats in favor of maximizing your elemental resistance.

### Hate and aggro

Hate is a value held by each enemy, for each player on the team, and determines who is targeted by their ST attacks. Each enemy keeps track of its hate value towards every player; a player damaging an enemy will increase the hate value held by that enemy for that player. Healing and revives also generates hate, equally across all enemies relative to the amount healed/players revived.

It is the guardian's job to manage aggro, generally by maintaining the highest hate value on all enemies for as much of the fight as possible. You can do this in two ways:

1. use high-damage guardian damage weapons with hate multipliers to accumulate hate faster than your team
2. use cursed/clod to steal aggro from your team

Method 1 typically involves maintaining the 8x hate buff from bronze and using guardian damage weapons like lance/mer/kerat/velme to dish out continuous damage and accumulate hate. Weapons such as terra provide a second hate multiplier buff, which applies to its own damage and usually the next attack as well. Some weapons such as glanz/clima have an effect which further multiplies the hate generated by its own attack. Maintaining hate this way means you want to be attacking as often as you can to stay ahead of the DPS in hate.

For method 2, see [Cursed/Clod](#cursedclod).

### Buffs

The following are the list of buffs that guardians are responsible for maintaining, as of this writing:

- [H] party physical damage taken down (mitra/abyss/stone)
- [G] party magic damage taken down (folia/blume/stone)
- [I] self physical damage taken down (steel/lance/tamtam)
- [F] self magic damage taken down (steel/lance/tamtam)
- [A] self hate gain multiplier (bronze/bell/terra)

### Guardian damage

Some shields will do guardian damage, which deals **physical damage** scaling with your **pdef** stat.

Spears will do special guardian damage, which deals **magic damage** scaling on the **higher of your pdef or mdef** stat.

Both of these damage types are affected by miti buffs/debuffs by half of its value - mitra/steel will increase guardian damage by 40%, while dark fang will only increase damage by 23.5% (30% pdmg increase but 5% pdmg decrease from 10% pdmg miti debuff).

### Inverted scales

Guardians are guaranteed to get the inverted scales buff when attacking with spears. The buff has no duration and is consumed the next time you are attacked to increase your DK gauge. You cannot stack the buff while it is active, but some weapons will give more than one stack at a time.

### Guts

Some weapons grant guts, which is a no-duration buff that is consumed when an attack would have killed you to keep you alive with 1 HP. You cannot stack the buff while it is active.

Some considerations regarding guts:
- it can be useful as an insurance to prevent wipes if you make a mistake
- it can be hard on your cleric to try and heal you back up if you rely on guts too much
- if there are multiple enemies, you will often be killed right after guts is consumed by another attack

## Weapons

### Core rainbows/reroll guide

In priority order:

- Cursed Fang (cursed): primary AOE aggro, see [Cursed/Clod](#cursedclod) for explanation
- Mitra Knight’s Spada (mitra): 30% pdmg miti buff on party, extended by stone
- Folia Guard (folia): 30% mdmg miti buff on party, extended by stone
- Draak Shield (draak): additional 30% (50% on DK) pdmg miti buff on party for 7.9s, for blocking 1-2 strong AOE attacks
- Träne Schild (trane): additional 30% (50% on DK) mdmg miti buff on party for 7.9s, for blocking 1-2 strong AOE attacks

### Required non-rainbows

Should only be replaced by a rainbow weapon that works as well or better:

- Steel Falchion (steel/falc) - 50% pdmg/mdmg miti buff on self
- Bronze Spatha (bronze/spatha) - 800% aggro multiplier on all attacks
- Stone Plate (stone/plate) - 10% (20% with DK) pdmg/mdmg miti buff on party, extends mitra/folia
- Abyss Gladius (abyss) - 20% pdmg miti buff on party, poor man's mitra if no mitra
- Blume Schild (blume) - 20% mdmg miti buff on party, poor man's folia if no folia

Abyss and Blume can be exchanged for mysterious scales in the shop - all others are common gacha drops and any star can be used (one copy can be received in guardian job coaching).

### Other important components

Non-rainbows listed, replace with rainbows that have the same effects:

- Holy Lance (lance/spear) - extends steel, does guardian damage to build aggro
- Holy Spine (spine)/Wood Semence (germ): 20% increased healing received
- Lebelle (bell)/Mythril Cutlass (cutlass): AOE damage for maintaining AOE aggro; bell can also extend bronze
- Crystal Clod (clod): single target version of cursed, see [Cursed/Clod](#cursedclod)
- Phantom Skull/Crystal Sphere (skull/sphere): pdmg/mdmg debuff against enemy, usually used by archer but sometimes requested from guardian if archer wants to use other weapons

Lance can be exchanged for pearls in the shop - all others are common gacha drops and any star can be used.

### Cursed/Clod

Cursed Fang and its single-target non-rainbow counterpart Crystal Clod do not work exactly as they are described. Many folks have attempted to discern the exact mechanics of their aggro-stealing effect, but no one has yet to get all the numbers to add up in a sensible way.

We know the following for sure:

- on use (regardless of misses), you immediately gain aggro
- the amount of hate received is the highest hate value on your team other than yourself
- there is some cumulative aspect to the hate gain, rather than just an overwrite as the description says

There are two prevailing theories on the cumulative aspect:

- on use, you steal the highest hate value, and everyone else's hate is reset to 0
- on use, the highest hate value is added to your current hate value

Both explanations more or less support the observed effect: as you continue to use cursed/clod as the fight goes on, you can hold aggro for longer and longer before you need to use it again; if you use it when the enemy is below 50% health, you will keep aggro the rest of the fight.

Regardless of the exact mechanics, cursed/clod is extremely valuable as an aggro weapon because it scales with your teammate's damage/healing - no matter how strong your DPS/healers are, you are guaranteed to maintain aggro after a certain point in the fight. In particular, while ST aggro is relatively easy to maintain with bronze and guardian damage weapons, AOE shields are very rare, and guardian damage AOE shields are even rarer, making normal AOE aggro very difficult when playing with strong DPS. This is why Cursed Fang is the one rainbow you definitely want to have.

Here is my guidance for using cursed/clod:

- time your first use on turn 4/5, right after mage DK
- keep it in your rotation for the first 4-5 rotations, after which you can start skipping if needed
- aggro will be shaky the first 2-3 rotations - if your team is taking too many hits, adjust as needed:
  - add bronze to generate extra aggro between your cooldowns
  - bring both cursed and clod so you can reactively use the second one if needed
- beware of the 1s cast time on cursed - make sure you use it quickly enough to grab aggro before an ST attack
- because cursed/clod aggro is timing-dependent, you should *definitely* look up and be familiar with the boss mechanics if you plan to rely on them for aggro

DISCLAIMER: this may very well be a bug - while we have confirmed it works the same way in the JP version, there is no guarantee that it will not change in the future

### General weapon grid template

1. mitra/folia
1. mitra/folia or flex if only one type of damage
1. steel
1. stone
1. bronze or flex if relying on cursed/clod for aggro
1. st aggro (clod/lance/guardian damage shield)
1. aoe aggro (cursed/mythril/bell/aoe large damage shield) or flex if only one enemy
1. back/healing item (frutta/wood semence/angel mirror/tamtam) or flex if no back needed


## Armor/Accessories/Support

Since new items are constantly being added, it is hard to maintain a recommendation list of specific items to use; rather, it is easier to think of it in terms of choosing items that maximize pdef, mdef, and HP. Generally you want to maximize pdef first, then HP second, because:

- most single-target attacks are physical
- most guardian damage weapons scale off of pdef
- a large HP pool can somewhat make up for lower mdef
- most guardian gear, i.e. gear whose skills provide something useful to guardians, have high pdef and HP

With this in mind, you will want to collect 4-star guardian gear which has skills that increase pdef - here are some examples:

- mitra gear from Pehn
- kerat gear from Isvaal
- noble accessories from Hiveval
- mitra+ armor from blue seed gacha
- mitra s gear from mysterious scale shop

**However**, as noted in [Damage and resistances](#damageandresistances), elemental resistance is much more important than your stats, so it is advisable to still collect 4-star non-guardian gear (SM and archer gear work just fine) for at least your support grid, so that you can bring 20% resist to every fight.

Also see [jadesphere's guide on farmable accessories](https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/886892174556413992/903090845383798794/unknown.png)

### EX Gear

In EX fights where everyone’s power is restricted to a certain value, your stats are calculated based on the percentage distribution of each stat at level 1 proportional to the sum of all level 1 stats (with HP being reduced to 66%) of each of your items. This makes it very difficult to know what your stats will be in EX fights, since you cannot simply calculate it based on your total stats if some of your items are leveled past 1.

Here are the recommendations at the time of this writing (tl;dr go farm rainbow beach):

- Your main equipment should largely stay the same, as bonuses from skills and synths still apply; exception would be if you have rainbows that are worse stats-wise because you can’t max limit-break them, but have skills that are significantly better (e.g. lordly vs. mitra)
- Weapon support: a 1-star Wooden Stake has a 33.3% pdef distribution value, which is better than almost all weapons in the game (highest currently is 35.5%), and can be farmed in rainbow beach
- Armor and accessories support: the concierge set has 30% pdef distribution value, which is better than almost all non-rainbow armor in the game, and can be traded with ink drops from rainbow beach

Because of the ease of farming the equipment, it is highly recommended that you save a full support set of each element, so that you can maximize your elemental resistance.

Also see [jadesphere's EX gear guide](https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/882100101374414848/901001709340463124/unknown.png)

### Inventory management

My recommendations:

1. Use 200-500 sc to expand your inventory (those pulls were going to be trash anyway)
1. Lock all of your element subgrid sets
1. Limit break duplicate 4-star shields/useful MDs
1. Orb all 1-star weapons and any 2/3-star versions of any non-farmable shields/useful MDs
1. Orb all 4-star armor/acc and 3-star souls for guardian gear
1. Orb all 4-star armor/acc that give HP/mdef synths
1. Disassemble all 1/2/3-star armor/acc
1. Disassemble 4-star armor/acc that aren't useful
1. Disassemble 2/3-star versions of farmable weapons (weps that have 1-star versions)
1. Disassemble 4-star non-guardian weapons

The general idea here is that you:

- keep and improve useful 4-star gear
- orb gear you don't need right now so you can use them for synths or extra crystals later
- slowly save up 1-star weapons so you eventually can limit break a 4-star
- only use 2/3-star to limit break weapons that don't have a 1-star version
- keep a steady income of red crystals (which are scarce) by disassembling 2/3-stars and useless 4-stars


## Rotations

People will say guardian is an easy class because all we do is sit in front and soak damage. This is in fact true, so you really have no excuse to mess up the one job you have: maintain a consistent rotation to keep up miti and aggro. The hard part is doing so while adapting to mechanics that require you to change things up, and refresh buffs on your swordsman who just revived for the 5th time this fight.

Most buffs you are responsible for last for 25 seconds. Given that weapons have a 4-5 second use time, and usually less than 25 and greater than 12 seconds cooldown, your rotation should be either 4 or 5 weapons (at the moment there is no practical rotation using six 4-second-use weapons). Making sure no rotation ever exceeds 5 attacks is the most important part of maintaining consistency in your fights.

You will usually start fights with an “opener” - a series of attacks that set up buffs to be extended by your core rotation. The order of your opener should be determined by the type and timing of the boss’s first attack - if they attack quickly, you need to prioritize aggro, then either self or party miti depending on the type of attack, or you may need to prioritize AOE aggro in stages that have multiple enemies. It can also be influenced by the strength of your party, as the first part of the fight is when your aggro is most unstable. You may need to weave in high-damage attacks or use cursed/clod right before boss attacks to try and grab aggro from your DPS in time.

If you are missing mitra/folia/abyss/blume, you will need to use your first DK on stone to establish the 20% party miti. Otherwise, your DK should be focused on your high-damage attacks, to build up and maintain a solid lead on aggro. Alternatively, you could save them for self-healing if you feel like you’re in a pinch and the healer is too busy trying to revive the swordsman for the 8th time. If you are using draak/trane (and relying on cursed/clod for aggro), you should save your DKs for them to increase the miti amount.

Once you are into your core rotation, your focus is on when to break rotation to do things like back on TBs/boss mechanics, heal yourself, and reapply buffs on revived teammates. Because harder fights require constant flexibility, a 3 or 4-weapon core rotation is generally preferred to leave plenty of extra padding in your 25 second window. Try not to queue too many actions so that you can quickly adapt when you need to, and always know exactly where you are in your rotation so that you never lose buffs after breaking rotation.

Here are some examples of openers and core rotations (swap for rainbows where appropriate):

### Openers

- bronze - steel - mitra - folia - lance: a standard opener that sets up all the buffs you need; the healing from mitra/folia provides some aggro but time lance to grab aggro before a big attack
- bronze - lance - steel - mitra - folia: for when a boss has a very fast ST first attack; better that you take it without all your miti up than a DPS
- bronze - cutlass - mitra - folia - steel: for fights with multiple enemies to prioritize AOE aggro and party buffs
- bronze - lance - mitra - folia - spine - steel: a very greedy 6-item opener that sets up everything you want; note that bronze will expire towards the end, but not a big deal if it’s just for those few seconds before being refreshed

### Core rotations

- bronze - stone - spine - lance: standard core rotation that extends all buffs
- bronze - stone - spine - cutlass - lance: a 5-rotation for fights that don’t require a lot of adapting; skip cutlass to adapt when needed
- bell - stone - cutlass - lance: an AOE-oriented rotation with bell extending bronze

Some notes:

- Order for core rotation doesn’t matter aside from making sure it lines up with your opener to not let things expire. Pick an order you’ll remember and stick to it.
- While I include spine in many rotations here, it is the least necessary of all the items - feel free to replace it with whatever else you have that’s on a 16 second cooldown or less.
- Keeping your grid organized is underrated - when panic sets in, the visuals of your grid and the weapon cooldowns help a lot more than you think in getting your rotation back. Put your core rotation in an easy pattern (down the row or in a circle) and your single-use items on the outside.
- Don’t listen to people that tell you to stop attacking when poisoned - who knows how long you have to wait, and how long it will take to put buffs back. Either believe in your healer and tough it out, or bring a klingel.
- Generally, boss attack animation lengths line up with your weapon timers, so try to plan ahead - e.g. Hildegard’s “Attack Stance - Wintry Wind” has two animations before the hit, so you have enough time for 1-2 attacks before you need to use your back item.
- If your rotation breaks badly or you ended up waiting too long on a boss mechanic and you’re not sure if your buffs expired, be on the safe side and just refresh them - e.g. do steel - mitra - folia then jump back into your core rotation.
